Update contribution guide to include more detailed instructions (#5169)
microsoft/CBL-Mariner: CONTRIBUTING.md

> # Contents

Reviewer: Please make sure Jim reviews this before checking in.

Reviewer 2: Summoning @jperrin

Author: Done :)

CBL-Mariner packages live in either [SPECS](SPECS) or [SPECS-EXTENDED](SPECS-EXTENDED). CBL-Mariner packages that are in the `SPECS` directory have full support and coverage with timely CVE maintenance. Packages in `SPECS-EXTENDED` are for experimentation or proof-of-concept purposes only. `SPECS-EXTENDED` can be used as a staging area for iterating on packages with the possiblity of the package being graduated to `SPECS`.

| Package Support Level | Published | Supported | Comments
|:----------------------|:----------|:--------|:------------
|SPECS-EXTENDED         |**Yes**    |No       | - Package needs a viable upstream source which actively addresses CVEs <br> - Package must not include project specific code
|SPECS                  |**Yes**    |**Yes**  | - Package needs a viable upstream source which actively addresses CVEs <br> - Package must not include project specific code <br> - Package needs to offer value for multiple use cases

When looking to graduate a package from `SPECS-EXTENDED` to `SPECS`, file a [GitHub issue](https://github.com/microsoft/CBL-Mariner/issues) highlighting the package's value and ensure that the following steps are completed for associated PRs.

> 1. Bump the release

Reviewer 3: Can we be a bit more descriptive in what "bump the release" actually means?

Author: Done :)

1. Add changelog entries "Package promoted from SPECS-EXTENDED to SPECS" and "License verified"
1. Add a `%check` section to the spec if not already present and confirm it passes
1. Ensure spec is free of references, macros, comments, etc. only applicable to other distros
1. Complete the [PR checklist](#pr-checklist)

> 1. Pass the GitHub checks

Reviewer 4: Should we add the following
1. if the package that you are changing exists in toolchain_x86_64.txt, you may want to rebuild the tool chain
   sudo make toolchain REBUILD_TOOLS=y REBUILD_TOOLCHAIN=y
and then

    make build-packages CONFIG_FILE=

Author: Because that is included in the PR checklist, I am not sure it needs to be called out. That being said, I do callout %check to further highlight it should be added if not already there.

### Toolkit

> We welcome tooling improvements. When contributing to the toolkit, please adhere to `golang` formatting as described by the [fmt](https://pkg.go.dev/fmt) package. To format using this package, you can run `make go-tidy-all` in your CBL-Mariner toolkit. For guidance building with the toolkit, see our [building instructions](toolkit/docs/building/building.md).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We welcome tooling improvements. When contributing to the toolkit, please adhere to `golang` formatting as described by the [fmt](https://pkg.go.dev/fmt) package. To format using this package, you can run `make go-tidy-all` in your CBL-Mariner toolkit. For guidance on building with the toolkit, see our [building instructions](toolkit/docs/building/building.md).
```

Author: Thank you for your guidance **on** this . I will fix now ;).

|2.0-stable    |No       |  Yes      | Last published release
|2.0-preview   |No       |No         | Publishing in progress

| Branch / Tag | For PRs | Published | Notes
|:-------------|:--------|:----------|:------------
|1.0-dev       |Yes      |No         | Development branch for 1.0
|1.0           |No       |Yes - eventually    | Staging branch for publishing
|1.0-stable    |No       |Yes        | Last published release
|1.0-preview   |No       |No         | Publishing in progress

### PR Titles

PR titles should start with an action

```bash
- Add <package>
- Bump Release version for October Update
- Change whatever you changed.
- Fix <thing you fixed> <reason you fixed it>
- Patch <package> to fix CVE-XXXX-YYYY, CVE-XXXX-YYYY…
- Upgrade <package> to version vvvv to fix CVE-XXXX-YYYY…
- Remove <package> <reason you removed it>
```

Please avoid titles such as

```bash
- package: <whatever you did to the package>
- CVE-XXXX-YYYY (leaving off what package was patched or upgraded)
- [1.0] (prefixing with branch or other information)
```

### PR Checklist

When creating your PR, please ensure the following:

> * The toolchain has been rebuilt successfully (or no changes were made to it). This only applies if you changed any packages in the [toolchain package manifests](toolkit/resources/manifests/package). Specifically, `toolchain_x86_64.txt` and `toolchain_aarch64.txt`. For guidance building the toolchain, see our [building instructions](toolkit/docs/building/building.md).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* The toolchain has been rebuilt successfully (or no changes were made to it). This only applies if you changed any packages in the [toolchain package manifests](toolkit/resources/manifests/package). Specifically, `toolchain_x86_64.txt` and `toolchain_aarch64.txt`. For guidance on building the toolchain, see our [building instructions](toolkit/docs/building/building.md).
```

> * The [toolchain / worker package manifests](toolkit/resources/manifests/package) are up-to-date (versions match latest package versions in SPEC files). The manifests are the following files:

Reviewer 4: I had issues here, i found that if i branched from main, the packages defined here were not always available in the upstream blob storage and i would get 404 when building the tool chain

Is it best practice before we build?
git checkout 2.0  -- toolchain_x86_64.txt

Author: `main` may include changes to the toolchain packages which have not yet been published. This is why they aren't available to be downladed. To avoid having to rebuild the toolchain, `2.0-stable` 's manifests can be used but just note that the manifests won't be guaranteed to match `main`. Therefore, when merging into `main` you still need to ensure you aren't rolling back TC versions

Microsoft follows the principle of [Coordinated Vulnerability Disclosure](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/msrc/cvd).

<!-- END MICROSOFT SECURITY.MD BLOCK -->

# Develop for CBL-Mariner
When starting to develop for CBL-Mariner, use the [CBL-MarinerTutorials](https://github.com/microsoft/CBL-MarinerTutorials) repo. This repository guides developers on using CBL-Mariner's tools to customize or add new packages or images. Once you have confirmed your change builds and functions as expected, consider whether it should be added to the core repo, [CBL-Mariner](https://github.com/microsoft/CBL-Mariner).

> Please see either our [quickstart](toolkit/docs/quick_start/quickstart.md) or [building instructions](toolkit/docs/building/building.md) for technical instructions on building with CBL-Mariner.

Reviewer 5: How about:
```suggestion
Please see our [quickstart](toolkit/docs/quick_start/quickstart.md) for a tutorial and [building instructions](toolkit/docs/building/building.md) for an in-depth overview of building with CBL-Mariner.
```

Please adhere to the [Pull Request guidelines](pull-request-guidelines) when contributing. 

## Packages

> CBL-Mariner packages live in either [SPECS](SPECS) or [SPECS-EXTENDED](SPECS-EXTENDED). CBL-Mariner's core packages (`SPECS`) have full support and coverage. Packages in `SPECS-EXTENDED` are only guaranteed to compile successfully. `SPECS-EXTENDED` can be used as a staging area for iterating on packages with the possiblity of the package being graduated to `SPECS`. 

Reviewer 5: I think use of the `core packages` can introduce confusion for a casual reader who may not be aware with our terminology, because we also have a meta package `core-packages.spec` that contains the minimal possible packages ....
```suggestion
CBL-Mariner packages live in either [SPECS](SPECS) or [SPECS-EXTENDED](SPECS-EXTENDED). CBL-Mariner packages that are in the `SPECS` directory have full support and coverage with timely CVE maintenance. Packages in `SPECS-EXTENDED` are only guaranteed to compile successfully. `SPECS-EXTENDED` can be used as a staging area for iterating on packages with the possiblity of the package being graduated to `SPECS`. 
```

> CBL-Mariner packages live in either [SPECS](SPECS) or [SPECS-EXTENDED](SPECS-EXTENDED). CBL-Mariner's core packages (`SPECS`) have full support and coverage. Packages in `SPECS-EXTENDED` are only guaranteed to compile successfully. `SPECS-EXTENDED` can be used as a staging area for iterating on packages with the possiblity of the package being graduated to `SPECS`. 

Reviewer: Please change "Packages in `SPECS-EXTENDED` are only guaranteed to compile successfully." to "Packages in `SPECS-EXTENDED` are for experimentation or proof-of-concept purposes only."

| Package Support Level | Published | Supported | Comments 
|:----------------------|:----------|:--------|:------------
|SPECS-EXTENDED         |**Yes**    |No       | - Package needs a viable upstream source which actively addresses CVEs <br> - Package must not include project specific code
|SPECS                  |**Yes**    |**Yes**  | - Package needs a viable upstream source which actively addresses CVEs <br> - Package must not include project specific code <br> - Package needs to offer value for multiple use cases

> When looking to graduate a package from `SPECS` to `SPECS-EXTENDED`, consult with a CBL-Mariner dev to highlight the package's value and ensure that the following steps are completed.

Reviewer 6: you mean the opposite here? graduate from SPECS-EXTENDED to SPECS

Author: Yes, thank you!

> When looking to graduate a package from `SPECS-EXTENDED` to `SPECS`, consult with a CBL-Mariner dev to highlight the package's value and ensure that the following steps are completed.

Reviewer 2: `consult with a CBL-Mariner dev` is quite vague for an external contributor. Also an easy for package graduation requests to be missed

Tagging @htaubenfeld for additional thoughts. Maybe open as a GitHub issue?

Reviewer 5: +1 for github issue

- Bump the release
- Add changelog entries "Package promoted from SPECS-EXTENDED to SPECS" and "License verified" 
- Add a %check section passes if not already present
- Ensure spec is free of references, macros, comments, etc. only applicable to other distros
- Complete the PR checklist
- Pass the GitHub checks

## Toolkit

> We welcome tooling improvements. Please adhere to `golang` formatting when contributing to the toolkit. For guidance building with the toolkit, see our [building instructions](toolkit/docs/building/building.md).

Reviewer 7: Is there an external link we can link to for golang formatting?

# Pull Request Guidelines
Please direct pull requests to the desired development branch. Development changes to `2.0` should target `main`. Development changes to `1.0` should target `1.0-dev`. 
## Branch structure
An overview of how the branches are structured can be seen below

| Branch / Tag | For PRs | Published | Notes
|:-------------|:--------|:----------|:------------
|main          |Yes       |No         | **Primary development branch**
|2.0           |No       |Yes - eventually   | Staging branch for publishing
|2.0-stable    |No       |  Yes      | Last published release
|2.0-preview   |No       |No         | Publishing in progress

| Branch / Tag | For PRs | Published | Notes
|:-------------|:--------|:----------|:------------
|1.0-dev       |Yes      |No         | Development branch for 1.0
|1.0           |No       |Yes - eventually    | Staging branch for publishing
|1.0-stable    |No       |Yes        | Last published release
|1.0-preview   |No       |No         | Publishing in progress

<br>

## PR Titles
PR titles should start with an action
```
- Add <package>
- Bump Release version for October Update

> - Changed whatever you changed.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Change whatever you changed.
```

- Fix <thing you fixed> <reason you fixed it>
- Patch <package> to fix CVE-XXXX-YYYY, CVE-XXXX-YYYY…
- Upgrade <package> to version vvvv to fix CVE-XXXX-YYYY…
- Remove <package> <reason you removed it>
```

Please avoid titles such as
```
- package: <whatever you did to the package>
- CVE-XXXX-YYYY (leaving off what package was patched or upgraded)
- [1.0] (prefixing with branch or other information)
```

## PR Checklist
When creating your PR, please ensure the following:
- The toolchain has been rebuilt successfully (or no changes were made to it). This only applies if you changed any packages in the [toolchain package manifests](toolkit/resources/manifests/package). Specifically, `toolchain_x86_64.txt` and `toolchain_aarch64.txt`. For guidance building the toolchain, see our [building instructions](toolkit/docs/building/building.md).

- The [toolchain / worker package manifests](toolkit/resources/manifests/package) are up-to-date (versions match latest package versions in SPEC files). The manifests are the following files:
   - toolchain_x86_64.txt
   - toolchain_aarch64.txt
   - pkggen_core_x86_64.txt
   - pkggen_core_aarch64.txt

> - Any updated packages successfully build (or no packages were changed). For guidance building packages, see our [building instructions](toolkit/docs/building/building.md). Please ensure the package is located in the [appropriate folder](#new-packages).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Any updated packages successfully build (or no packages were changed). For guidance on building packages, see our [building instructions](toolkit/docs/building/building.md). Please ensure the package is located in the [appropriate folder](#new-packages).
```

-  Packages depending on static components modified in this PR (Golang, *-static subpackages, etc.) have had their `Release` tag incremented. Dependent packages are packages which contain a `BuildRequires` on the package you are updating and create static links from your package. This can be difficult to discern based on spec files alone and may require investigating `make` commands in dependent packages or consulting a CBL-Mariner dev.

- Package tests (%check section) have been verified with RUN_CHECK=y for existing SPEC files, or added to new SPEC files. When running the check section, results will not fail a build. Check the logs for the results of this section. 

> - All package sources are available. The sources are either in the source server or local folders `SPECS/<package>/SOURCES` or `SPECS/<package>`. While it is possible to build packages with all sources inside the repo, our policy is generally to have the source compressed and placed on the source server. Uploading to the source server can only be accomplished by a CBL-Mariner developer. Please request help in your PR for uploading your sources to the source server. To check the source server see https://cblmarinerstorage.blob.core.windows.net/sources/core/< source tar >.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- All package sources are available. The sources are either in the source server or local SPECS folders (`SPECS/<package>/SOURCES` or `SPECS/<package>`). While it is possible to build packages with all sources inside the repo, our policy is generally to have the source compressed and placed on the source server. Uploading to the source server can only be accomplished by a CBL-Mariner developer. Please request help in your PR for uploading your sources to the source server. To check the source server see https://cblmarinerstorage.blob.core.windows.net/sources/core/< source tar >.
```

  - ./SPECS/LICENSES-AND-NOTICES/data/licenses.json
  - ./SPECS/LICENSES-AND-NOTICES/LICENSES-MAP.md

  This can be checked by running
  ```bash
  python3 ./toolkit/scripts/license_map.py  \
  ./SPECS/LICENSES-AND-NOTICES/data/licenses.json \
  ./SPECS/LICENSES-AND-NOTICES/LICENSES-MAP.md \
  ./SPECS \
  ./SPECS-EXTENDED \
  ./SPECS-SIGNED
  ```
- All source files have up-to-date hashes in the *.signatures.json files. This hash is generated by `sha256sum`. You can also use the make tools to automatically update these hashes. 
   ```bash
   cd toolkit
   sudo make input-srpms REBUILD_TOOLS=y SRPM_FILE_SIGNATURE_HANDLING=update
   ```
- If you modified the go tools, ensure that the formatting meets golang's standards and that the tests still pass. 
   ```bash
   cd toolkit
   # fix formatting
   sudo make go-tidy-all
   # check tests
   sudo make go-test-coverage
   ```
- Documentation has been updated to match any changes to the build system. See [toolkit/docs](toolkit/docs).

# Bugs

> If the bug is security related, please use the [security guidelines](#security-vulnerabilities) above. Please use the [issues page](https://github.com/microsoft/CBL-Mariner/issues) on CBL-Mariner to file any other bugs.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
If the bug is security related, please use the [security guidelines](#security-vulnerabilities) above. Otherwise, please use the [issues page](https://github.com/microsoft/CBL-Mariner/issues) on CBL-Mariner to file any other bugs.
```

Microsoft follows the principle of [Coordinated Vulnerability Disclosure](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/msrc/cvd).

<!-- END MICROSOFT SECURITY.MD BLOCK -->

# Develop for CBL-Mariner
## Choose a repo

> The first step in developing with CBL-Mariner is to determine which repo fits your use case. If you are just looking to develop using CBL-Mariner's tools and packages, check out the [CBL-MarinerTutorials](https://github.com/microsoft/CBL-MarinerTutorials) repo. `CBL-MarinerTutorials` is geared towards creating custom CBL-Mariner builds rather than contributing to the tools or common tools. 

Author: ```suggestion
The first step in developing with CBL-Mariner is to determine which repo fits your use case. If you are just looking to develop using CBL-Mariner's tools and packages, check out the [CBL-MarinerTutorials](https://github.com/microsoft/CBL-MarinerTutorials) repo. `CBL-MarinerTutorials` is geared towards creating custom CBL-Mariner builds rather than contributing to the tools or common packages. 
```

> The first step in developing with CBL-Mariner is to determine which repo fits your use case. If you are just looking to develop using CBL-Mariner's tools and packages, check out the [CBL-MarinerTutorials](https://github.com/microsoft/CBL-MarinerTutorials) repo. `CBL-MarinerTutorials` is geared towards creating custom CBL-Mariner builds rather than contributing to the tools or common packages. 

Reviewer 2: Recommend to start everyone looking to contribute packages over at CBL-MarinerTutorials, rather than presenting a decision first.

Once they have a package building, then they can read on to determine if contributing that package into this CBL-Mariner repo makes sense.

    id2C[Do you want to use Mariner for your project? \n ex. bare metal, IoT, embedded devices, etc.]:::nodeLittle
    id2D([<a href='https://github.com/microsoft/CBL-MarinerTutorials' style='color: #ADD8E6'>Use the CBL-MarinerTutorials repo</a>]):::nodeBig
    id3A[Do you want to fix an issue in Mariner?]:::nodeLittle
    id3B[Do you want to add a common package? \n either a package supported by another major distro \nor a package used widely across popular open-source projects]:::nodeLittle
    id3C[Do you want to modify a supported Mariner package?]:::nodeLittle
    id3D[Do you want to rebuild Mariner from end-to-end?]:::nodeLittle
    id3E([<a href='https://github.com/microsoft/CBL-Mariner' style='color: #ADD8E6'>Use the CBL-Mariner repo</a>]):::nodeBig

    %% node flow
    id1 -->|customize| id2A
    id2A -.-|or| id2B
    id2B -.-|or| id2C
    id2C -->|yes to any of the above| id2D
    id1 --> |contribute|id3A
    id3A -.-|or| id3B
    id3B -.-|or| id3C
    id3C -.-|or| id3D
    id3D-->|yes to any of the above|id3E
```
## New packages

> New packages fall into one of three buckets: Mariner `SPECS`, Mariner `SPECS-EXTENDED`, or outside support. Mariner core (`SPECS`) includes full support and coverage. Packages in `SPECS-EXTENDED` are only guaranteed to compile successfully. Outside support means the package is not built or published by Mariner but instead by the user. Please see [CBL-MarinerTutorials](https://github.com/microsoft/CBL-MarinerTutorials) for building outside packages.

Author: I was hoping to highlight that this is an option for users (doesn't need to live on CBL-Mariner). I can remove for clarity though as this file explicitly is contributing to CBL-Mariner.

| Package Support Level | Builds | Published | CVE SLA | Restrictions 
|:----------------------|:-------|:----------|:--------|:------------

> |SPECS                  |**Yes** |**Yes**    |**Yes**  | - have a viable upstream source which actively addresses CVEs <br> - not include project specific code <br> - have value for multiple use cases

Reviewer 2: The restrictions seem odd to me reading from an external contributor's perspective. How is a contributor to know when to place their changes in SPECS vs SPECS-EXTENDED?

Perhaps highlight the graduation model, where package contributions first go to SPECS-EXTENDED to be built and iterated on, with a possible path to graduating into SPECS.

|SPECS-EXTENDED         |**Yes** |**Yes**    |No       | - have a viable upstream source which actively addresses CVEs <br> - not include project specific code

> |Outside                |No      |No         |No       | - no restrictions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Remove?
